thanks everybody for being here and
coming out this early and for Barry for
putting this amazing show together I'm
going to share with you today a study
that's actually at some level been going
on for 10 years I it's based in our own
prelinger library i started in 2006 on
this quixotic project to read every
trade magazine that relates to the
history of technology because i wanted
to understand the history of Technology
and I thought trade magazines would be
comprehensible and would probably tell a
version of the history different from
what I might find in an academic
historical account although I read those
two and what I found on during this
process of reading all the trades and by
trades I mean magazines that were
published for for people working with in
industries such as Aviation Week and
proceedings of the Institute of the
electrical and electronic engineers for
example so one of the first things I
noticed was this was a dialogue between
utopia and dystopia playing out on the
pages advertisements promoting utopian
visions of technology while the news
articles these these two pieces are
within like a half dozen pages of each
other in the same issue of aviation week
we're on the left the Lockheed Electra
is going to you know named for character
Electra of Greek mythology and framed in
a starscape and three pages later it's
crash has marred the beginning of the
jet age
and if I'd been the editor I would have
pulled the ad but there it is in in diet
those two things in dialogue with one
another and you know I'll confess to
being a space really deep space
technology fan and one of the origin
point but going back ten years was to
understand space technology that was one
of the origin points and one of the
things that really jumped out at me was
another kind of dialogic relationship
which was between a trade literature
itself and science fiction literature
and their respective visual and
narrative vernaculars and I made a whole
multi-year study of that dialogic
relationship and exploring how to
explain space technology in those terms
and that's the book that came out of
that part of the study but there is an
aspect to my interest in space
technology that didn't have directly to
do with you know rocketry or science
fiction vernaculars and and that was the
timing of it and the more subtle
supporting factors behind the timing of
the maturation of space technology I
think we're familiar with the Cold War
imperatives and the import of the German
rocket program that caused spaceflight
to happen when it did in the late 50s
but you know in studying space
technology I realized that there were
all these supporting systems and those
systems were computational they were the
ground-based mainframe computers that
supported flight technology you know
flight systems on the ground and then
the miniaturization transistor driven
miniaturization that enabled flight
systems on board really scaled down
spacecraft and of course the higher they
fly the smaller they needed to get so I
started I'm just using this image
because I really like it but where I'm
heading is that after this facebook i
started to focus on
find understand why the mainframes
matured at the same time as transistor
based miniaturization and how those two
systems supported the maturation of
space technologies when they did and
then doing all of that through this
practice of a dialogic study of how
graphic artists explained the new
technologies and developing a hybrid
interdisciplinary study of the history
of graphic design and with the history
of technology so learning to look at the
art and these are the periodicals that
were reviewed for the electronics book
and the way well let me go back and say
that this kind of a dialogic study of
how I technological narratives and
graphic design created to convey those
narratives draw upon and relate to one
another it's not something that can be
done easily through through digital
tools can't be done through keyword
searching and can't be done with
editions of the magazines as has
happened in some libraries that have
been preserved without any of their
advertisements intact or the cover art
as we'll see so I did start in our own
library but I also went to libraries all
over the country doing research and
another I kind of contributor to this
process was being a FileMaker hobbyist
which had been for many many years and
you know this was how I did organize the
research was by building databases and
making my own little like tagging
systems and running all different kinds
of searches seven ways from Sunday to
see how different kinds of keyword tag
results combined in different ways like
if I you know I ultimately you know
there are about 1400 records in there
images in the book but 1,400 records so
I kind of arrived at the chapter
structure by like figuring out which
surrealist ads that talked about
transistors you know made sense next to
one another and things like that so I'm
going to work towards saying something
about the relationship between art and
the history of computing but I'm going
to start here first a little bit
chronologically with reading vacuum tube
vernaculars and so this is Herbert Beier
working for General Electric in 1943
this is the cover of a booklet that he
produced for GE to promote a bunch of
their emerging actually projects they'd
worked on throughout the interwar period
but we're going to come to maturation in
the world war two and and deep public
maturation in the post-war era and this
at first glance this image is a little
corny like as visual vernaculars go it's
a little corny but I think it bears some
unpacking because here bear has put the
earth at the center of the tube and he
was a bow house artist as the next
speaker is going to speak more on the
relationship between Bauhaus and
environmental art but bear was a Bauhaus
School artist who was an environmental
artist who made both earthworks and
World atlases that were like artists
books and so it's an here in this period
in time he's working within a framework
where you know the kind of mechanistic
models of understanding technology that
many of us were born to take for granted
actually hadn't been totally established
yet they were not yet necessarily the
norm there were a lot of antecedent ways
of thinking about technology as
something akin to an organic
that drawn the 19th century
understanding of electricity as a kind
of bio Philip thing and as early as 1909
the physicists identified you know in
understanding this structure of the
electron invoked the model of the solar
system in understanding the electron and
bears working here in this superficially
corny image to invoke all of these
contexts the solar system model of the
electron on the planet centered model of
the role of the artist and the
relationship of the artist to bring the
planet to the center of thinking about
technology and this kind of bio phila
core ganic warm sense of the future I
was also very interested in for every
image that really caught my attention
and drew me to want to unpack it as in
it's a kind of art historical context
what was it saying about the history of
Technology like why did Bear cheese that
tube or work he was working hand in hand
with GE engineers why was that tube for
grounded and I'll move right on but
there it is the GL 880 and this is the
vacuum cue that made FM radio possible
and so that's why the geospatial motif
was invoked and so powerfully and why
that tube was on the cover of that
booklet about the future of post-war
technology and the you know the idea of
organic spatiality is kind of backed up
here and more quotidian terms with this
little map about how FM radio is going
to change the shape of radio broadcast
landscapes and now moving right on
another kind of cathode ray tube three
years later introducing the invocation
of Surrealism
in the representation of electronic
technologies you know electronic
technologies as they matured in the
1920s and 1930s with the expansion of
radio and television created a hierarchy
of sense perception by creating multiple
channels through which sounds and images
were carried and replicated in ways they
never had before and many artists I
think if you think of the surrealist
movement over emerging and maturing in
the 1920s it's at the same time as radio
became popular and TV was becoming
functionally implemented if not yet
exactly popular and so there's a
relationship here between the surrealist
impulse and a representation of
multiplication of the senses and there's
also a science fiction reference here as
well as a reference to surveillance
culture which was of course and it could
have there there are a lot of artworks
that reference the emergence of
surveillance culture this is just one of
them but I sort of picked it because it
also reference in science fiction at the
same time where the surveillance tool is
also kind of like a planet that's
reflecting a future version of the
planet below it kind of like in an
ursula leguin novel where there are two
planets in different phases of time so
another surrealist gesture to explore
I'm surrealist vernacular of vacuum
tubes to explore the proliferation of
the senses and I kind of put this slide
in just for this conference because it's
so nice to look at and so cathode ray
tubes expressed multiplication of the
senses but they also correspond to mind
they contributed to the brains and
organs of early computers
this is an ad for a kind of a tube that
stores data within a computer and which
is a you know I'm going to turn now and
focus on the emergence of mainframe
computing or getting there after reading
circuit symbols so after learning to
read images and really working on how to
read images I came to understand when
studying history of computing technology
that the term literal was more I mean
the term reading was more literal than I
had ever meant for it to be in other
phases of study and so when I recognized
these symbols which I have to credit my
science distribution for humanities
majors in college where I'd learned to
read circuit diagrams and build radios
that was the image that got me focused
on studying representations of the
transistor and what really caught the
attention is that um the artists didn't
need to invent a visual language for
transistors the transistor itself there
you know layered over the tube totally
resisted creative stylization either
vernacular or otherwise of any kind and
instead the circuit symbols were what
harmonized they were the prior art that
the graphic artists of the time drew
upon and brought into a visual dialogue
of geometric minimalism and this reading
this image it tells a story of anxiety
and competition in produced by the
electron tube information council which
was a unit within General Electric even
tells you something about how big the
company was even as they were developing
transistorized flight systems on the
main for
beams were still tube driven some of
them even in 1960 and this is a little
booklet created to convince with the
tube symbol at the top and the
transistor at the bottom that tubes were
going to stay alive for a while which of
course they they didn't they became very
specialized after that but the circuit
diagram language its simplicity of lime
line and form was really wonderfully
adapted by artists this is an oil
painting and so there are a lot of ways
in which the history of this
relationship between art and technology
speaks to contemporary issues one of
them is when when is the artist
anonymous and when does the artist get
to claim authorship of their work and I
did try to this one looks so much like a
painting that might hang on a wall it's
mentioned here I did try to identify the
artists behind every piece of work but
most of them were consigned to anonymity
or the corporate records that might have
held their identities have been lost
over time and here's a transistor symbol
used as a frame to space promoting a
Lockheed transistor driven miniaturized
space systems so that process of reading
circuit symbol diagrams opened me up to
the idea of reading visible language
into the history of computing which was
very generative I'll stop for a moment
of century-old prehistory about
typographic art typographic art really
the Italian futurists in the wet in
Western traditions typography was not
considered an art form per se
but the Futurists of poetry movement
harnessed printed letters to the service
of poetry and turned the visual
representation of letter forms into its
own art form and shortly thereafter when
the graphic art was defined as art that
was made for reproduction and this is
eliz its key and I studied how number
forms might ever have been used as
artworks and and found that they really
weren't this is I put this in here
because it's about the only artwork i
could find outside of this trade art
made for technology that deployed number
forms but they're deployed here just
denotative ly to convey the volume and
the issue number of this publication and
in like bringing that frame to a study
of all of the art made to convey
technology it became evident that the
innovation of the commercial artists who
were making work for the computer
industry of the 1950s was to deploy
numbers and mathematical symbols as
essential but distinct partners to
alphabetic forms and to bring new life
to typographic art and to cause
typographic art to go into particular
service to explain technology and to
communicate things about the history of
technology that actually couldn't be
explained in visual terms in any other
way and this is a recruitment
advertisement to bring engineers in to
work on an inertial guidance system that
General Motors was building for Nassif
for the Gemini program actually many of
these recruitment ads are very program
specific because different flight
programs had very different
you know flight systems and they needed
engineers of particular skills and so
this is a new nuance and typographic art
where the art was designed to kind of
bring the mathematical or computational
I into the artwork and invite people to
identify mathematics computational
processes with the with the art and with
the entire programmatic objectives of
the development of technology and you
know historians of Technology ask
themselves and prompt themselves to
answer the question of how to new
technologies establish themselves in
society and how does society adapt to
them and the typographic art helps
develop a science frame around new
technologies like I said there wasn't
always sometimes such something like
radio is considered very soft and
organic I'm going to come back to this
but I'm going to show it twice and this
is the just the first time but it turned
out that type of graphic art for
computing canvas 'full to convey it
convey a few really specific things one
of them was the emergence of AI
technologies another was the emergence
of programming as a profession and then
the emergence and then the history of
the Commerce of the mainframe as a
combined project of different antecedent
technologies right here we go into a iso
OCR has a history that goes back to the
1950s Lincoln laboratories IBM and MIT
were all working at the same time in the
50s on optical character recognition
technologies
most of these projects were about
training computers to read grids and
superimposing grids over visual
perceptible fields and then training
cathode ray tubes that could see you
know the antecedents of today's scanners
to fill in a dot matrix and then artists
used all kinds of strategies to talk
about this this actually quotes a robert
rauschenberg piece and asks the question
what tells the machine that I am A five
designating recognition logic key for to
recognizing handwriting in 1965 they
were worried about how OCR was going to
adapt to reading handwriting and this is
the issue of the proceedings that
announced a 1959 breakthrough by Bell
Labs using an IBM 704 which was actually
a tube driven mainframe the vacuum tube
industry wasn't totally wrong many of
the most powerful computers into the
1960s worse you know large computers
were all tube driven and could run more
powerful programs than transistors
transistorized computing didn't catch up
with the functionality for a number of
years even though they kind of became
the the leading face of the future and
something more about the research you
know this is an artwork made to express
an achievement in pattern recognition
and when I contacted the archives of the
proceedings of the I re I found that
even the institutional archives and the
professional historians of the
Association they'd kept all their the
associations own in their own history
center in there
archives of their own organizational
history every magazine had been stripped
of its cover before it was conserved and
no records were kept about the artists
who made the work for the covers and
this is a crime against the historical
memory of the work that artists did to
explain the technology I really loved
that one on so other language centered
designs target or released designed and
published by language centered readers
again that this is a this a period of
soft definition between mechanistic and
organic models of understanding what
computing was and what it was going to
do and the emergence of programming
languages and language based
applications were actually mobilized to
draw because you know only you know as
of 1950 only six or eight people were
computer programmers and there had to be
people drawn from beyond mathematics in
other words people drawn from
language-based traditions towards
computing and a lot of this language
centered artwork to recruit people into
programming was about that was about how
the field was going to be defined when
they needed to actually hire you know
program translation programs create
translation programs Cold War
applications in 1963 Bell Labs produced
this this is a record jacket of a 7-inch
created to promote success with
computerized speech and the record
contains the recording of a bicycle
built for two that is familiar to us
from the movie 2001 a Space Odyssey and
when I did this research what I learned
is that the recording actually led and
inspired the movie
part it wasn't like in a contemporary
environment where you might write a
script and then find the right audio to
fill you know narrative moment like a
poignant song that a computer might sing
in this instance the computer was taught
to sing the song in the early 60s the
record was put out in 63 and helped
shaped the idea the ideas that were
going to be explored in the movie and
and was in the movie for that reason
kind of an unlooked-for science
fictional moment and well recruiting so
concrete poetry used to recruit
programmers I an invention of the 1950s
to put language on the page to be looked
at for poetic effect and the recruitment
language suggests a position for
programming on the spectrum of art and
science by I saying programming is the
science of getting computers and users
to talk to one another where the human
mind would inflect the word art
programming you know in the sense of the
art of getting one thing or one person
to talk to one another again visible
language visible language it's
noteworthy that this is a hand script I
and so we're the type of graphic art
expresses number systems it's I
recruiting for people who are going to
work in scientific programming but the
programming of scientific machines but
they use of the hand script I think also
communicates that this is still like at
some level I hybrid humanities and
science venture
poetry of numbers I like how in the
upper left corner just in case you can't
read it they tell you what it is one two
three four five six seven eight nine
zero just in case it's a little too
abstract so the emergence of mainframe
computers the antecedent technologies of
course were data processing punch card
information with antecedents in mostly
in telegraphy and in population in the
census data and then with business
applications that's in the 19th century
and in the 20th century business
applications in like you know tracking
humans and their salaries and then
there's the totally separate tradition
of scientific calculation that starts
with adding machines and calculators and
we couldn't have mainframe computers
without these two antecedent
technologies beings effectively combined
with one another and the the process of
combining those two antecedence was
non-trivial and a lot of companies
worked very hard at it and produced all
different kinds of machines that
machines with specialized scientific
applications and specialized data
processing calculations and then the
super machines that could do both and
this was a you know a new idea at the
time that a machine could do both things
and the burroughs corporation that had
been a typewriter company decided to
enter the mainframe computing industry
and one reason as we'll see in a few
slides they're kind of over-represented
in the artwork is because they were they
had to play catch-up to join the big
leagues with IBM and they were competing
directly against IBM with their machine
and they're they're using these visual
terms very clearly to say
that this machine does both jobs equally
well the tweezer of scientific
calculation and the shovel of data
processing and this is an adverb eros
term up promote the same machine and
referencing Russian constructivism there
are more instances than this in which
Russian constructivist graphic art is
referenced but this one's pretty
striking this is the poster for the
nineteen thirty film bite seiga ver Tov
man with a movie camera and it's a
classic considered a classic in the
history of like Soviet poster art and
you know I have to just wonder you know
what was was it a humor or sarcasm or
both or just ordinary admiration that
caused the the kind of remobilization of
Soviet art and the service of American
cold war-era technologies be so most
mainframes yeah I'm just going to stop
you're right before we go on point out
that one little corner of the quixotic
project is to track appearances of Pi in
graphic art and there it is there aren't
that many but companies really wanted
NASA contract so they were recruiting
people to who were familiar with the
development of space flight systems and
they would also brag just widely to the
whole industry audience if they got a
contract for now so which boroughs did
the datatron machine used to control
launches and
I'm we're back to this because we're
talking about burrows and this is a
vacuum tube mainframe and it's unique in
having been promoted four years before
it was made the the long promotional
window of this machine as a foreshadow
in its own structural way of the
predominance of mainframe computers when
it was built and this is it was the
first machine to have software bundled
with hardware and so it's historically
significant but since Burroughs was
later absorbed by unisys and its name
identity has largely been forgotten it's
not much known outside academic
histories of computing but the the
tapestry here of scientific calculations
numbers for data processing and paper
tape and 8-bit strip art create this
visually arresting lattice of design and
then at the same time that these ads
were published the Royal McBee Libre
scope computer was the fourth largest
maker of small machines and they
invested in they had to work hard to
communicate that they were still making
science based machines that had
primarily science applications and
promoting the speed and accuracy of
their machines with mathematical
computations and we're not suitable for
data processing and you know when I was
listening to the conversations yesterday
people were talking about the you know
getting beyond the the keyboard like the
future of art and technology is you know
always facing towards the integration of
hand craft and
hand script with automated processes and
I think this artwork really expresses
that and then here IBM's promoting its
recent delivery of 27 thousand computers
to NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center
and promoting their application doing
test drives for the Saturn rocket and it
was because of the emergence of
mainframes that the Saturn rocket didn't
have the kind of launch pad failures
that had plagued earlier launch systems
and this is really beautiful bit of type
of graphic art and RCA chimes in and
says us too because they specialized in
building small scale computers that
adapted legacy NASA information systems
to the new large mainframes and more
space technology laboratories
recruitment ads promoting science based
applications of computing technologies
telescope the apple and this is a ad by
a sperry rand promoting the first and
not promoting actually recruiting people
to work on the telemetry control
programs for the surveyor spacecraft the
ad is from 61 which tells us it's a I
mean and there were other reasons
recruitment advertisement because the
the program didn't actually land till 65
but when it did it was the first
successful landing on the moon and I
just love the the binary the stream of
binary language the code stream another
computer company you've never heard of
that made beautiful typographic art
about are they sponsored beautiful type
of graphic art about computing its mark
heart and
another code stream and mark heart the
reason you haven't heard about them is
because they put all their eggs in one
basket which was the nerve a rocket
program the nuclear engine for rocket
vehicle applications and they were
building ground-based systems and flight
systems for the nerve a rocket and then
in nineteen seventy to the nuclear
rocket programs were all cancelled and
they went out of business and that's why
they're not known I've been referring
here to artists like I said fairly
generally some and anonymously it's
there were some who were identifiable
through research one of them as
Jacqueline Casey who is a staff artist
at MIT in the MIT publications office
and she did a series of artworks
recruiting engineers scientists
programmers and researchers to work at
Lincoln laboratories and she was really
one of the most skilled and prolific
graphic designers whose work explained
in promoted technology she here she's
layered the number code that represents
a rate radaris radio astronomy scan of
the constellation cassiopeia be over a
photograph of that constellation
suggesting a harmony between analog and
digital ways of seeing and this is the
he or she has I'm going to stop here and
refer for a minute back to Herbert Beier
and the earth bulb okay the planet at
the center and the invocation of a
spatial relationship between the
electron in the solar system
and you know in a way I see this image
and this is the culminating image of
this talk I'm going to stay with it for
a minute is closes of parenthesis that
they are opened in representation of
technology because she's actually done
many of the same things that bayer did
in that earth bulb image and just done
them in completely different and novel
visual terms of collage and I she's got
the block she's got a block diagram
conveying computing she's got she took
nine technical papers and cut them up
into strips and made the collage but she
specifically chose representations of
solar system physics solid state
electron physics that relate to the
development of transistors and
capacitors and as well as information
signal analysis and all of these
processes are represented in their own
visual language terms but she
specifically got the microscopic element
of the solid state physics in direct
conjunction with the research paper
about the motion of the bodies in the
solar system and she put the rounded
suggesting an organic sense of
Technology the rounded shapes at the
center of the image and this her
strategy of playing with found texts is
nothing new to our eyes today exactly
but it was pretty new in 1963 and
specifically you know in the book this
book has the book that I wrote that it's
that explains these histories and many
more adjacent histories in pretty good
detail has about three endings and what
I'm bringing you today is the art
history ending because after this image
there was nothing else that was new
because she really everything that came
after it referred to something else that
had already been done and particularly
here what she's done is questioned the
role of the artist and suggest a
different model of the artist relating
to the work of the engineers and in
other context the artists and engineers
have worked hand-in-hand with the artist
finding new visual terms to explain the
technology and here she sort of didn't
have to she went right to the visible
language of the technical literature
itself and proposed a different
relationship a role for herself as the
artist which is as the collage 'used and
suggested that the technical research is
itself its own art and again I she kind
of refers forward to our own historical
moment when data streams are recognized
as art in themselves and you know that's
what I find so powerful about this image
you know the suggestion of this
different model of a relationship
between art and technology a different
model they did end up having a lot of
energy even as at the time in 1963 this
one image is a bit of an outlier she
offered evidence that the technical
paper is its own art and does not need
art made about it except this and so
thank you
yep right time for questions I did I say
that that are you know it also closed
the geospatial through line that had
been opened as early as 1909 by the
physicists proposing the solar system
model by putting those you know
computing and solar system research
papers in immediate conjunction with one
another right ok questions come on oh
come on I'm not the only one who's awake
yes I don't have to stand up
right I yes so the question is about the
material production tools available to
artists and one of the themes in this
book is about the kind of Forgotten
conjunctions between handcraft and
Technology and there's a what I found is
that actually graphic artists and some
people who were building circuit boards
for instance we're using many of the
exact same tools which I found very
interesting but mostly artists were
working in old-school analog production
environments on drafting boards with you
know masking elements paper you know
pencils that but you know at that period
in time many technologists technologists
were working with those same tools so
there was less of a I think you know our
historical memory tends to map big
differences on two different kinds of
processes because they live in such
different parts of our cultural memory
but in in this case they weren't always
that far apart from one another
especially in terms of their
circumstances of material production
Peter so it strikes me when we talk
about technology today we often don't
use these techniques is that because
it's just familiar and we don't need as
much metaphor or we're not using we're
not using as much exploratory art and
also if we look at things that are in
fact brand new people who are trying
kind of you know new processes in either
automation locomotion or things that are
brand new that aren't just part of the
computer literacy are people going back
and using kind of more original forms of
expression to try to explain things that
are new to us today well our media
landscape is so totally different from
the mid-century it's hard to make direct
comparisons
you know for like now we have a very
active journalism universe explaining
new technological ideas both to industry
and to the general public and that did
that wasn't really as much going on back
then and the artists had a very specific
and crucial job to do to convey changes
in technology and visual terms I don't
but that being said you know I obviously
we wouldn't be here if art wasn't still
as important in its I you know kind of
octopus eight leveled handshake with
technology octopus shape date level
handshake with technology as as it was
back then actually it strikes me it's
kind of the opposite i did a search on
you know AI and all the images i found
are like totally similar using typos and
stream of data and some image of the
brain they like it's it it doesn't
changed it's still using those you know
those type of illustrations to for like
stuff we cannot grasp yet right right
type of graphic art I'm talking about
its emergence as a tool for explaining
technology I think you know it's it's
obviously still widely used and is like
I don't think it's as widely used o to
convey really programmatic specifics I
mean I think that was unique to the time
the idea that you could get a a kind of
Brock of whether a machine or a company
or a product or a process or a project
was had more of a scientific technical
application or more of an information
processing application just by the
nature the graphic art that was being
made for it more for the public right
and you know one reason Jacqueline
Casey's artwork
so memorable is it sort of opened a door
or I don't know how many people even saw
it though but it was I think in in
historical terms the earliest of a kind
of extremely ambitious collage to
interrupt preconceived ideas of how art
could or should explain technology you
know ideas that have then had long lives
since then but hers was the earliest
thanks man we got moved this train along
unfortunately today it's fascinating
topic and there are lots of questions
I'm sure thanks yeah